# RNA Seq project workflow
## Experiment Overview
The overall goal of this project is to investigate how the presence of abscence of thiamine (Vitamin B) affects gene transcription in *Candida albicans*, an opportunistic fungal pathogen. Three isolates of wild type *C. albicans* (WTA, WTB, and WTC) were grown under two experimental treatments: in the presence of thiamine (thi+) and in the abscence of thiamine (thi-). Next, RNASeq was used to sequence the transcriptome of each of the isolates under each condition. This generated 6 sets of sequencing data (WTA1, WTA2, WTB1, WTB2, WTC1, and WTC2) labeled 1 for the presence of thiamine (1 = thi+) and 2 for the abscence of thiamine (2 = thi-). Each set of sequencing data generated 2 fasta files for the forward and reverse reads (for example: WTC1_1.fq.gz contains the forward reads for isolate C under thi+ conditions and WTC1_2.fq.gz contains the reverse reads).
## Raw data 
I worked on the RNA sequence data (generated by RNASeq) for isolate C in the presence of thiamine (WTC1). The raw data files are WTC1_1.fq.gz (fwr) and WTC1_2.fq.gz (rev).
## Quality analysis and trimming
I used fastqc software to evaluate the quality of the reads and looked at results (Fastqc/WTC1_1_fastqc.html and Fastqc/WTC1_2_fastqc.html) to determine optimum trimming setting. The number of reads in each fasta file (for forward and reverse reads) was 20752795 before cleaning. 
Then, I trimmed reads according to settings in vartrimmomatic_script.SBATCH.
After trimming, I repeated fastqc analysis on the trimmed files to confirm improvements in per-base sequence quality, per-base sequence content, and adapter contamination (Fastqc/WTC1_1.trPE_fastqc.html and Fastqc/WTC1_2.trPE_fastqc.html). Fastqc generated files for paired-end (PE) and single-end (SE) reads, and the paired-end reads were used for further analysis. The number of reads after trimming was 19924384, indicating that 96% of the reads were retained in the cleaning process. See https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1AOa-XaTzR_PKMIRQDmu8oDTmawXXnkIwEjKOQkNC7Vs/edit?gid=0#gid=0 for details on the quality analysis and trimming of the other files for the other isolates and experimental conditions in this project. 
## Alignment
I aligned trimmed reads to reference C. albicans genome (C. albicans genome/ GCF_000182965.3_ASM18296v3_genomic.fna.gz from NCBI) using bowtie2. This generated the output file WTC1.sam. 
The results of the alignment as summarized in the z01 file: 19924384 reads; of these:
  19924384 (100.00%) were paired; of these:
    936104 (4.70%) aligned concordantly 0 times
    17783228 (89.25%) aligned concordantly exactly 1 time
    1205052 (6.05%) aligned concordantly >1 times
    ----
    936104 pairs aligned concordantly 0 times; of these:
      345379 (36.90%) aligned discordantly 1 time
    ----
    590725 pairs aligned 0 times concordantly or discordantly; of these:
      1181450 mates make up the pairs; of these:
        718444 (60.81%) aligned 0 times
        414129 (35.05%) aligned exactly 1 time
        48877 (4.14%) aligned >1 times
98.20% overall alignment rate.
The alignment rates and further details about the alignment results for the other files in this experiment are summarized in https://docs.google.com/spreadsheets/d/1fa-FXVMlCXOZkbHSx_mMg0OXLMy9BeBJg8uWrEMpKGo/edit?usp=sharing. 
## Sorting and Indexing
I used samtools to convert the mapped reads from the .sam file (sequence aligntment map) to a sorted and indexed .bam file for further analysis. The file was sorted according to the default coordinate (the leftmost coordinate). Then, the file was indexed for fast random access to generate a BAI file (WTC1.srt.bam.bai). 
## Counting Reads
I used htseqq -count within the HTSeq python package to count how many reads align to each annotated feature in the *C. albicans* genome. This program requires loading a conda environment and counts the number of reads from WTC1.srt.bam that are assigned to each gene annotated in the *C. albicans*_GTF annotation file. The reads were counted according to the settings in script/varhtseq.SBATCH. The reads were ordered by position (-r pos), the read were not stranded (-s no). the feature type analyzed was exons (-t exon), and the GTF attribute used was the gene ID (-i gene_id). This generated the output file WTC1_htseqCount. 
## Differential Expression Analysis
Differential expression of *C. albicans* genes between the two experimental conditions (Thi- = NTH, Thi+ = TH) was analyzed using DESeq2. The analysis was performed on the HtSeq output files for each isolate under each condition (NTH_WTA2_htseqCount, NTH_WTB2_htseqCount, NTH_WTC2_htseqCount, TH_WTA1_htseqCount, TH_WTB1_htseqCount, and TH_WTC1_htseqCount). 
